CHECKLIST:
CRIMINAL LAW READING CHECKLIST 
⭐ WEEK 1 (JAN 13 & 15):  o [ ] Pages 1–53  
⭐ WEEK 2 (JAN 20 & 22):  o [ ] Pages 189–248 
⭐ WEEK 3 (JAN 27 & 29):  o [ ] Pages 248–294 
⭐ WEEK 4 (FEB 3 & 5):  o [ ] Pages 294–350 
⭐ WEEK 5 (FEB 10 & 12): MIDTERM EXAM o [ ] Pages 350–375  
⭐ WEEK 6 (FEB 19):  o [ ] Pages 378–405  
⭐ WEEK 7 (FEB 24 & 26): o [ ] Pages 405–460; 1161–1170  
⭐ WEEK 8 (MAR 3 & 5): o [ ] Pages 567–626 
⭐ WEEK 9 (MAR 10): o [ ] Spring Break (No classes) 
⭐ WEEK 10 (MAR 17 & 19): 
o [ ] Pages 627–644; 651–685 
⭐ WEEK 11 (MAR 24 & 26):  o Pages 685–741  
⭐ WEEK 11 CONTINUED (MAR 31):  o [ ] Pages 759–760; 803–832  
⭐ WEEK 12 (APR 7 & 9):  o [ ] Pages 832–896 
⭐ WEEK 13 (APR 14 & 16) EASEMENTS o [ ] Pages 896–960 
⭐ WEEK 14 (APR 21 & 23): COVENANTS o [ ] Pages 960–990;  o [ ] Course Review    

FALL 11 ANSWERS:
CRIMINAL LAW  PROFESSOR DEWOLF  
FALL 2011  December 12, 2011  
 FINAL EXAM SAMPLE ANSWER  
 
 MULTIPLE CHOICE  
 
 1.  (A) is incorrect, because a solicitation does not require agreement on the part of the 
object of the solicitation;  (B) is incorrect o fr the same reason;  (C) is incorrect, because the killing 
must be immediately  necessary in order to prevent rape, kidnapping, or death; thus, (D) is the 
correct  answer.  
 2.  (A) is incorrect, because one can be guilty of solicitation even if the one being  solicited 
isn't receptive to the solicitation; (B) is correct , because her words could be interpreted as 
encouraging the commission of the crime; (C) is incorrect for the same reason as (A); (D) is 
incorrect because it isn't sufficient to show that Melani e was lying about the abuse; she must still 
have the purpose of encouraging murder.  
 3.  (A) is incorrect, because the threat doesn't need to be imminent; it only needs to be 
"immediately necessary."  (B) is incorrect, because she might claim imperfect sel f-defense.  (C) is 
correct,  for the same reason as (B); (D) is incorrect, because imperfect self -defense doesn't require 
the reasonableness of a belief in the need for self -defense, so long as the mens rea required is higher 
than negligence (which in this case, solicitation, it is).  
 4.  (A) is correct , because it is the standard of duress (although it assumes ; (B) is incorrect, 
because "but -for" causation does not apply in cases of accomplice liability; (C) is incorrect, because 
negligence in subjecting o nself to duress is sufficient for a conviction only for those crimes for 
which negligence suffices as the minimum culpability; murder is not one of those crimes; (D) is 
incorrect, because it would be sufficient to deny the defense of duress if one is reckl ess in putting 
oneself in a situation where duress will probably be applied.  
 5.  (A) is incorrect, because driving the car was a voluntary action; (B) is incorrect, because 
if she was negligent in failing to recognize that the car had been negligently rep aired, her mens rea 
would be sufficient to satisfy the minimum culpability for the crime ; (C) is correct , because it 
would constitute recklessness, which more than satisfies the minimum culpability, which is 
negligence.  (D) is incorrect, because (C) is a correct answer.  
 6.  (A) is incorrect, because it was a mistake of law; (B) is incorrect, because Mike could be 
guilty as an accomplice; (C) is incorrect, because Mike would have to have the purpose  of 
facilitating the illegal copying; (D) is incorrect, be cause the "natural and probable consequences" 
standard (the Pinkerton  standard) is not accepted by the MPC; thus (E) is the correct answer.  
 7.  (A) is an incorrect answer, because it assumes that Ann owed a duty to prevent Caroline 
from choking.  She migh t, but it's not necessarily the case.  (B) is incorrect, because it states a 
negligence standard, and the statute requires at least recklessness.  (C) is correct , because causation 
is an essential part of the crime definition.  (D) is incorrect for the sam e reason as (A) -- it assumes 
a fact not necessarily the case.  
 8.  (A) is (partially) correct, because intoxication can be a defense to a crime requiring 
knowledge or purpose; (B) is (partially) correct, because manslaughter only requires recklessness, 
and intoxication is effectively irrelevant to a finding of recklessness; (C) is (partially) correct, 
because extreme emotional disturbance reduces murder to manslaughter.  Thus, (D) is the best 
answer  and (E) is similarly incorrect.  
 9.  (A) is incorrect, be cause the mens rea with respect to the circumstance element of the 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 2  
 
crime (the amount of marijuana) is not defined by the MPC with respect to accomplice liability; (B) 
is similarly incorrect;  (C) is similarly incorrect.  Thus, (D) is the correct  answer.  
 10.  (A) is incorrect, because her growing marijuana was directly related to the alleviation of 
the evil she was hoping to avoid ; (B) is correct , because in the absence of such proof there is no 
necessity; (C) and (D) are incorrect, because it is the actual  necessity of her conduct, rather than her 
belief about the conduct, that determines whether or not the defense of necessity applies.  
 11.  (A) is (partially) correct, because it accurately states the rule with respect to the law of 
conspiracy.  (B) is (pa rtially) correct, because it correctly states the rule regarding accomplice 
liability;  (C) is (partially) correct because of the "merger" rule.  Thus , (D) is the best answer , and 
(E) is correspondingly incorrect.  
 12.  (A) is incorrect, because the defaul t culpability is recklessness with respect to all of the 
elements (including Jack's identity as a law enforcement officer ); (B) is the correct  statement of the 
rule; (C) imposes too high a standard, as does (D).  
 
 ESSAY 1 
 
 There are strong arguments both  for and against:  
 Pro:  Capital punishment in such cases would serve several purposes of punishment.  (1) 
Retribution .  The punishment should fit the crime.  The rape of a child, particularly one below the 
age of 10, is so horrific in its consequences tha t only the most severe punishment is appropriate.  
Particularly where the defendant has been convicted of two previous rapes, there can be little 
question that the defendant deserves  the most severe punishment.  Moreover, to the extent that 
"vengeance" is questioned as a legitimate basis for punishment, this crime more than any would fit 
the claim by Sir James Fitzjames Stephen that it is "morally right to hate criminals."  Otherwise, 
society's failure to impose the most severe punishment would undermine so ciety's condemnation of 
the behavior.  (2) Deterrence .  While there is fierce debate over whether capital punishment deters 
murder, and there is no evidence as to whether capital punishment would deter child rape, one 
could argue that whereas murder is oft en a result of passion, child rapists frequently display stealth 
and cunning, and might "calculate" to a greater extent than other criminals.  (3) Incapacitation .  
Obviously the execution of child rapists will protect the public, although it is debatable w hether it 
provides greater protection than life without parole.  (4) Rehabilitation .  While rehabilitation might 
be an appropriate goal for certain kinds of offenses, the repeat child rapist is the least likely to 
qualify for rehabilitation.  
 In answer to the question about constitutionality, the decision rejecting the death penalty for 
child rape ( Kennedy v. Louisiana ) was a 5 -4 decision and relied heavily upon "trends" both 
nationally and internationally.  If Evergreen and other states pass such laws, and  particularly if they 
can be distinguished from the statute in Kennedy  by reason of the "3 -strikes" character, it might be 
found constitutional.  
 Con.  The first argument against this law is that the Supreme Court has already found a 
similar law unconstitu tional ( Kennedy v. Louisiana ).  The point of the decision was that imposing 
the penalty of death is commensurate only with a crime that results in death.  Otherwise the penalty 
is disproportionate.  Even if it were found constitutional (because of a change  in the court), it still 
fails to satisfy the expectations of the four purposes of punishment:  (1) Retribution .  Although 
executing child rapists would satisfy the desire to "get even" with the wrongdoer, a criminal justice 
system, in order to encourage l aw-abiding behavior, must be measured.  Executing child rapists 
would be excessive and disproportionate, and would therefore undermine the principle that 
punishment fits the crime.  (2) Deterrence .  Executing child rapists might actually make it more 
likely that children will be hurt or killed, by eliminating the difference in penalty between leaving a 
rape victim alive and killing the witness to the crime.  There is strong evidence that sex crimes are 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 3  
 
products of compulsion, and not susceptible to the kind  of "calculation" that the deterrence 
principle relies upon.  (3) Incapacitation .  Executing criminals is actually more expensive than life 
imprisonment.  Thus, for a lower cost, the public can be protected from future crime by life 
imprisonment without po ssibility of parole.  (4) Rehabilitation .  Even though the prospects for 
reforming child rapists is remote, the rehabilitation principle looks for at least the possibility that 
the humanity and dignity of the offender can be restored.  Execution is a rejec tion of the potential 
every human being has the ability to accept responsibility and change their behavior.  
  
 
 ESSAY 2 
  
 
 We will consider charging Cramer with the highest grade of homicide (murder), but the jury 
might convict him of a lesser form of murder such as manslaughter or negligent homicide.  Cr amer 
may argue self -defense or insanity to avoid conviction.  
 
Homicide  
 The different forms of homicide must be reviewed in order to determine the actus reus  
components for each grade of homicide as well as the mens rea . 
 Actus Reus .  Each form of homicide  seems to share the same actus reus, namely that the 
defendant caused  the death of another human being.   
 Causation .  As to causation, there are two components:  first, was his conduct a "but -for" 
cause -- would the death have occurred but for his conduct ?  The answer to that question is a 
straightfoward "yes."  The second aspect is that the result is not so remote or accidental in relation 
to Cramer's conduct that it fails to have a just bearing on Cramer's guilt.  Even though Cramer may 
not have struck A ugust with an intent to kill, the resulting death is not so remote or accidental in 
relation to the blow that Cramer struck that it would prevent us from saying that Cramer caused 
August's death.   With what mens rea he caused the death is the key question.  
 Mens Rea .  As noted above, the different grades of homicide are distinguished by the level 
of culpability with which the defendant caused the death.  
 Murder , MPC § 210.2(1)(a) .  In order to be convicted of murder, a first degree felony, 
Cramer would have  to have caused the homicide purposely or knowingly.  If Cramer intended to 
cause August's death, or if he knew it would cause his death, then he would be guilty of murder.  
Under the MPC, knowledge of a result requires a showing that the defendant was awa re that it was 
“practically certain” that the result would follow .  It would be difficult to show that Cramer, even 
though he wanted to harm August, thought it was “practically certain” that he would cause death.  
Nonetheless, Cramer's state of mind could be inferred from his behavior; even if he denied wanting 
to kill August, or even being aware of the danger of the blow that he struck, a jury could still find 
that in fact he not only had an awareness of the risk, but actually wanted to inflict a fatal blow. 
 Manslaughter , MPC § 210.3(1)(a) .  The next lowest grade of homicide, manslaughter, a 
second degree felony, only requires proof that the defendant caused the death recklessly.  
Recklessness means that the defendant was aware of the risk that the result could occur, and his 
conduct in taking the risk was a gross deviation from the standard of a law -abiding person.  Cramer 
may or may not have been aware of the risk that the blow he struck could cause death.  If he 
actually lacked such awareness, even if he  should have been aware of such a risk, he can't be found The facts of this case were drawn from State v. Cramer, 2007 WL 1094360 (N.J. 2007), in 
which the defendant's conviction for second -degree manslaughter was affirmed.   
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 4  
 
to be reckless.  Again, however, a jury might infer such awareness from his behavior.  And if he 
was aware of the risk, there isn’t much question that his conduct in striking the blow was a gross 
deviation from the standard of a law -abiding person.  
 Negligent Homicide , MPC § 210.4(1) .  The lowest grade of homicide, Negligent homicide, 
a third degree felony, only requires proof that the defendant should have been aware  of the risk of 
causing death, an d his failure to avoid the risk was a gross deviation from the standard of a 
reasonable person.  This would be the easiest test to meet.  Given the close proximity of August, 
and the force with which he was struck, it shouldn't be difficult to convince a j ury beyond a 
reasonable doubt that Cramer should have recognized that such a blow could result in death.  
 
Defenses  
 The first defense Cramer might offer is self -defense.  To qualify for self -defense under 
MPC § 3.04, Cramer would have to show that he belie ved the force was necessary to protect 
himself from unlawful force.  To begin with, the force being used against him was not unlawful.  
Although a belief  that the force was unlawful would still qualify (under the principle of imperfect 
self-defense,  discus sed below ), it is doubtful that Cramer actually believed such force was 
necessary.  He seemed to want to punish August rather than protect himself from unlawful force.  
Nonetheless, to the extent that Cramer actually believed that the force was necessary ( however 
unreasonable such a belief might be), it would be a defense to murder, because it would "negative" 
the mens rea that is required.  On the other hand, if Cramer was reckless in forming the belief that 
the force being used against him was unlawful , or that it was necessary, he could be convicted of a 
crime (manslaughter) that only requires recklessness .  Similarly, if his belief was unreasonable, or 
to put another way, he was negligent in forming the belief, he could be convicted of negligent 
homicide .  Thus, self -defense appear s to have relevance only if would otherwise be convicted of 
murder . 
 Insanity .  An additional defense is based upon MPC § 4.01, "Mental Disease or Defect 
Excluding Responsibility."  Cramer was clearly in a psychiatric institutio n and was diagnosed with 
paranoid schizophrenia.  The psychiatrist found that he was competent to stand trial, but that is a 
much lower standard than the one tha t is applied in e valuating whether or not the defendant is 
criminally responsible for his behavior.  Nonetheless, even conceding that Cramer suffered from a 
mental disease  or defect , the prosecution could still ask the jury to deny the application of this 
defense, for the following reasons:  
 (1) The criminal behavior was not a result  of the mental disease.  MPC § 4.01 would excuse 
Cramer's otherwise criminal behavior only if, as a result of  his paranoid schizophrenia, he lacked 
substantial capacity either to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct 
to the r equirements of law.  As the doctor pointed out, he was not suffering from hallucinations at 
the time he kicked August.  Cramer may have been affected  by his mental illness, but unless it 
resulted in  his lacking substantial capacity to appreciate the wrongf ulness of his conduct, or 
conform it to the requirements of law, his defense should fail.   
 (2) The evidence seems to support a finding that the defendant had substantial capacity both 
to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct and to conform his condu ct to the requirements of 
law.  Since Cramer characterized his actions as being designed to "teach [August] not to f*** with 
me," it appears that Cramer was well aware of what he was doing, appreciated the wrongfulness of 
his conduct .  Similarly, his purpo seful action suggests that he had the ability to conform his 
behavior to the requirements of law, but simply chose not to.  Thus, we should be able to defeat a 
defense arguing insanity . 
 
 
 QUESTION 2½ 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 5  
 
 
 The major differences in a non -MPC jurisdiction would be: 
 A different standard for homicide .  Many jurisdictions use formulations of homicide that 
differ from the MPC.  The ways in which homicide is graded in non -MPC jurisdictions were 
beyond the scope of our course coverage, but there could be substantial d ifferences in how murder, 
manslaughter, and negligent homicide are defined and graded.  
 No "imperfect defense" .  Many jurisdictions limit the application of self -defense to a 
reasonable  assessment of the need for protective force.  If Cramer unreasonably b elieved that such 
force was necessary, he would not be able to assert it even with regard to murder.  
 Insanity .  The MPC is probably the most generous formulation  of the insanity defense.  
Many jurisdictions have replaced  the MPC standard with something closer to the M’Naghten 
formulation.  Still, M’Naghten does contain a requirement that the defendant understand the nature 
and quality of his act and know that it was wrong.  However,  M’Naghten and other more restrictive 
definiti ons of the insanity defense have eliminated  the control prong found in the MPC.  
 Also, in place of the “substantial capacity ” test of the MPC, some jurisdictions require a 
"complete prostration" of faculties .  And in place of the “appreciation ” test used in the MPC, many 
jurisdictions require only that the defendant be aware of  either the nature and quality of the act, or 
the wrongfulness of the conduct.  
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 6  
 
CHECKLIST  
 
 ESSAY 1 
 
 Pros  
 Retributive principles  
 Gravity of crime requires DP 
 Repetition, (" 3 strikes ") justifies  
 Deterrent effect  
 Do child rapists calculate ? 
 Incapacitation  
 Is it better than life w/o parole ? 
 No need for rehabilitation  
 Constitutional rebuttal  
 Narrow decision; trends matter  
 Kennedy  didn't involve multiple victims  
  
  
   Cons  
 unconstitutional  
 Kennedy :  DP requires death of victim  
 Retribution:  Disproportionate  
 "Vengeance"  doesn't justi fy punishment  
 No evidence for deterrent  effect   
 "Brutalizing" effect may increase crime  
 Would rapists just kill their victims?  
 Incapacitation : life impr. is sufficient  
 Rehabilitation :  Not likely, but don't 
deny offender's humanity  
 Expense  of capital punishment  
  
  
 ESSAY 2 
 
 Overview  
 Actus Reus + Mens  Rea 
 Actus Reus : causing death  
 Causation analyzed  
 But-for + "not too remote / accidental"  
  
 Mens rea  
 Murder:  Purposely or knowingly  
 Knowing = practically certain  of result  
 Intent May be inferred from behavior  
  
 Manslaughter  
 Requires proof of Recklessness  
 Was C aware  of the risk that he might 
kill August  
 Was his behavior a gross deviation  
  
  
   Negligent Homicide  
 Mens Rea = Negligence  
 Proof that C should  have been aware  
  
 Defenses  
 Self-defense , MPC § 3.04  
 Only to protect against unlawful  force  
 Imperfect Self-defense  
 Belief is sufficient, even if unreason.  
 No evidence he thought it necessary  
 Likely useful only for murder  
  
 Insanity, MPC § 4.0 1 
 Competence  for trial vs. insanity  
 Lack of capacity must be a result of 
mental disease / defect  
 C didn't lack capacity to appreciate  
 C seemed able to control  his conduct  
  
 ESSAY 2½ 
 
 Difference in grading of homicide  
 Different standard for  self-defense  
 No imperfect self-defense  
  
  
 
  different standard for insanity  
 M'Naghten  test? 
 no control  prong  
 complete prostration vs. sub. capacity  
 appreciation  
  
           Exam # ______________  
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 7  
 
 
 
 
 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 8  
 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 9  
 
 