FALL 13 ANSWERS:
CRIMINAL LAW  PROFESSOR DEWOLF  
FALL 2013  December 14, 2013  
 FINAL EXAM SAMPLE ANSWER  
 
 MULTIPLE CHOICE  
 
 1.  (A) is the BEST  answer , because it includes the requirement that he be negligent in 
failing to recognize the danger to Tracie; (B) is incorrect , because even if he had a duty to her, he 
may not have been negligent in failing to recognize that she was in danger; (C) is incorrect, because 
it imposes a standard of recklessness, whereas the crime only requires negligence; (D) is incorrect, 
because he may have had a duty to prevent the injury . 
 2.  (A) is correct , because a recklessness standard applies to the element of the non -
recylcable character of the material; (B) is incorrect, because even if he removed the bag, he still 
could be convic ted of committing the crime; (C) is incorrect because it imposes a higher culpability 
standard for the circumstance elements than is required for the commission of the crime; and (D) is 
incorrect because it requires a knowledge standard for the circumstanc e element . 
 3.  (A) is incorrect, because knowledge isn’t enough to satisfy the requirement that she have 
the purpose of facilitating his commission of the crime; (B) is n’t the best answer, but it isn’t exactly 
wrong either, so I gave it credit as a correc t answer.  The MPC is deliberately ambiguous with 
respect to the circumstance element (in this case, the amount of the cocaine).  Thus, it’s possible 
that she could be convicted even if she had no culpability with respect to the amount ; (C) is 
correct , because if the crime didn’t occur, Sally isn’t an accomplice to committing the crime; (D) is 
incorrect, because Tom might have some person al defense (e.g., insanity) that doesn’t apply to 
Sally . 
 4.  (A) is correct , because the defense of necessity doesn’t ap ply unless the harm to be 
avoided is greater than the harm that he seeks to avoid; (B) is incorrect, because negligence isn’t 
sufficient to satisfy the mens rea of the crime, which requires intent or purpose; (C) is incorrect for 
the same reason; (D) is in correct, because the sincerity of his belief is insufficient to invoke the 
justification; he has to be right about it.  
 5.  (A) is correct , because she committed a substantial step in approaching his house; the 
only question is whether her conduct was stro ngly corroborative; (B) is incorrect, because her actual 
belief is not inconsistent with a finding that she had the purpose of entering a place where she did 
not have a right to be.  (C) is incorrect, because it employs a standard that is higher than the o ne 
used by the MPC; (D) is incorrect, because her choice to leave was not voluntary; it was a result of 
being unsuccessful in entering the house.  
 6.  (A) is incorrect, because it is not enough to have a mental disease or defect; the mental 
disease must ha ve been the reason for the criminal conduct; (B) is incorrect, because the act of 
driving was voluntary, even though falling asleep was not; (C) is incorrect, because he might have a 
defense based upon the first prong of the insanity defense even though th e second one didn’t apply; 
and thus (D) is the correct answer . 
 7.  (A) is an incorrect answer, because the MPC permits a unilateral conspiracy; (B) is 
incorrect, because again it is sufficient if the defendant believes that there was an agreement; (C) is 
correct,  because it is sufficient for a conspiracy convict ion; and (D) is incorrect because it imposes 
a requirement of an overt act, which doesn’t apply to first or second degree felonies.  
 8.  (A) is incorrect, because she may have owed a duty to help hi m because of the 
contractual relationship between them; (B) is incorrect, because whether her conduct was 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2013 , Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 2  
 
reasonable would be a question for the jury; (C) is correct;  even though it specifies a standard of 
recklessness, it would be enough to satisfy the  n egligence standard; and (D) is incorrect for the 
same reason as (B).  
 9.  (A) is incorrect, because it doesn’t posit that intoxication had anything to do with the 
decision to shoot Leon; (B) is correct , because he would qualify for the imperfect self -defen se rule; 
(C) is incorrect, because Walter still may have honestly believed that he was about to receive a 
serious bodily injury; and (D) is incorrect because attempted murder is not a general intent crime.  
 10.  (A) is incorrect, because the “transferred i ntent” rule could apply; (B) is incorrect, 
because under the transferred intent rule, the injury to a third person doesn’t need to be foreseeable; 
(C) is correct , because of the principle of transferred intent; and thus (D) is incorrect, because the 
defens es applied earlier to the shooting of Leon might also apply to Donna.  
 11.  (A) is correct , because Jason may otherwise satisfy the requirements of § 8967; (B) is 
incorrect, because what state you are in would be a question of fact rather than a question o f law; 
(C) is incorrect, because even if Jason didn’t intend to do so, it might be sufficient to show that he 
was reckless as to which state he was in; (D) is incorrect, because his motivation and Susan’s best 
interests are not relevant to whether he viola ted § 8967.  
 12.  (A) is incorrect, because the application of the penal code to these particular facts is a 
mistake of law for which no culpability is required; (B) is incorrect, since he operated the yacht and 
allowed the thing to fill up ; so long as the re is a voluntary act that leads to the bad result, the 
requirement is satisfied ; (C) is correct , because Ben only has to be reckless with respect to the 
discharge; and (D) is incorrect because it doesn’t take into account whether Ben was aware of the 
risk that the holding tank would overflow.  
 
 ESSAY 1 
 
 The retreat rule was inherited from the common law, and placed a higher value on the 
protection of human life, even if it required the surrender of a right that the actor might otherwise 
enjoy.  For exampl e, if a man in a wheelchair approaches you with a knife, and you have the 
opportunity to run away with complete safety, the Model Penal Code approach requires you to do 
so, even though the person wielding the knife had no right to force you to do so.  By c ontrast, so -
called “stand your ground” laws authorize an actor’s use of deadly force if he faces a threat of 
sufficient magnitude (e.g., death, rape, or kidnapping), even if the actor could also avoid the threat 
by retreating.  
 Even though many states adop ted the common law view of retreat, some states (influenced 
by the culture of the West) thought it was “unmanly” to require a person to retreat, and therefore 
rejected the retreat rule inherited from the common law .  The MPC retreat rule is actually quite 
restrictive:  it only requires that one retreat when one knows (not simply believes there is a high 
probability , or even should know ) that the actor can do so with complete safety .  Thus, the rule 
doesn’t apply if the jury finds (or, more accurately, unles s the jury believes the contrary beyond a 
reasonable doubt) that the defendant harbored some belief, however unreasonable or however 
improbable, that he might suffer some injury if he tried to flee.  
 Nonetheless, some people support a “stand your ground” l aw in the belief that the threat of 
using deadly force in self -defense actually make s the community safer.  There is some empirical 
evidence to support the (counterintuitive) theory that “more guns, less crime” – restricting the 
availability of handguns ac tually makes a community more dangerous rather than safer.  Along 
those lines, it might be thought (and it might turn out to be true) that by adopting a “stand your 
ground” law, a state will experience less crime because of the fear that more citizens will  use deadly 
force in self -protection than if the law seems more sympathetic to the criminal.  
 By contrast, those who oppose a “stand your ground” law believe that , given the already 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2013 , Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 3  
 
generous provisions for a defendant under the MPC, revising the statute to  permit the defendant to 
use deadly force even when he knows he can retreat with complete safety reflects a profound 
disrespect for the value of human life, and permits a disproportionate and unnecessary use of deadly 
force.  It permits the gratuitous use of deadly force essentially for a trivial reason – to protect a 
relatively minor property right or to support a “manly” approach to confrontation.  
   
 
 ESSAY 2 
  
 
 There are two ways that Cota could be convicted of manslaughter.  First, t he jury might find 
that Cota recklessly caused Antonio  Jr.’s death.  The second would be if he were found to be an 
accomplice to Almaguer’s killing of Antonio  Jr. Both will be analyzed below.  Cota would have 
available to him defenses based upon his intoxi cation and self -defense.  
 
Manslaughter  
 Manslaughter is defined as causing the death of another human being (MPC § 210.1) 
recklessly (MPC § 210.3).  The first requirement would be to show that Cota actually caused 
Antonio  Jr.’s death.  It is unclear from t he facts exactly what happened.  The report says that 
“Almaguer’s gun went off,” but it’s not clear whether Almaguer actually fired the gun, or it 
somehow went off while the two were struggling.  Cota wasn’t directly involved in this part of the 
fight.  He could only be blamed for his initial act of urinating from the balcony, and his later act of 
removing his shirt and preparing to join the fight.  However, both suffer from a defect in causation. 
 Even if the act of urinating from the balcony was a but-for cause of Antonio  Jr.’s death, it could 
hardly be said to be a proximate cause , which does not allow a finding of causation if the later result 
is so remote and/or accidental as to lack a just bearing on the defendant’s guilt .  On the other hand, 
Cota’s removing his shirt, which is more directly involved in the fatal shooting, seems to lack the 
element of but -for cause.  
 In addition, even assuming the MPC causation  test were satisfied, the prosecution would 
still have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that  Cota had the mens rea of recklessly killing 
Antonio  Jr.  Urinating from the balcony  would have to be done with a conscious awareness of the 
potential that this act could lead to someone’s death.  Cota would persuasively deny any such 
awareness  (although h is later encouragement of Almaguer to shoot again could be used to suggest 
that Cota and Almaguer were deliberately provoking a confrontation) . 
  
Accomplice to manslaughter  
 More plausible is the charge that Cota was an accomplice to manslaughter .  To conv ict 
Cota, the prosecution would have to show that Cota had the purpose of facilitating the conduct that 
risked the death of Antonio  Jr., and that with respect to that risk Cota acted recklessly.   
 Actus reus  of Accomplice Liability .  The actus reus of acc omplice liability is satisfied if the 
defendant “aids or agrees or attempts to aid [the principal] in planning or committing” the offense 
(MPC § 2.06(3)(ii).)  Here the prosecution would argue that in taking off his shirt and getting ready 
to join the figh t, Cota was agreeing to aid or attempting to aid Almaguer in fighting Antonio Sr.  
One difficulty with this is for the prosecution is that it is only later that Antonio Jr.  joined the fight.  
However, to the extent that Cota was reckless with respect to th e fact that somebody might be The facts of this case were (loosely) drawn from State v . Almaguer, 232 Ariz. 190, 30 3 P.3d 84 
(2013), which affirmed the defendant’s conviction for manslaughter.   It was modified to focus 
on the behavior of Cota rather than Almaguer.   
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2013 , Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 4  
 
fatally shot as a result of the fight, the change in identity of the victim doesn’t prevent a conviction.  
 The mens rea for accomplice liability distinguishes between the conduct element(s) and the 
result element(s) .  The mens  rea of purpose applies to the conduct element – and based on the 
above discussion a jury could find that Cota had the purpose of helping Almaguer in the fight.  On 
the other hand, mere recklessness is sufficient with respect to the result (death).  In thi s context 
Cota would be found reckless if he was aware of a risk that death might result and his choice of 
encountering the risk was a gross deviation from the standard of a law -abiding person.  So long as 
Cota was reckless with respect to the risk that fi ghting could lead to death, the fact that he didn’t 
have the purpose of causing anyone’s death doesn’t prevent his conviction.  In this respect the case 
is similar to McVay or the dragracing cases, where the defendant intended to facilitate conduct that 
the defendant was aware recklessly risked death.   
 With respect to Cota’s actually was aware  of the risk of death we have conflicting evidence. 
 On the one hand, Cota would undoubtedly claim that he only wanted to fight – he didn’t want to 
kill anybody.  (H is phone call from the car seems to support this.)  On the other hand, immediately 
after the shot was fired, Cota seemed to want Almaguer to continue shooting (although it’s unclear 
who he wanted Almaguer to shoot, since Almaguer was pointing the pistol at  two other men, not 
Antonio Jr.   Even though this encouragement occurred after the fact, it suggests that Cota was not 
simply anticipating a fight and was surprised that it resulted in a fatal shooting .   
 A key question would be whether Cota was aware at the time they arrived at the party that 
Almaguer had a handgun in his belt , and/or that Almaguer was likely to bring it out if a fight 
erupted .  If he was aware of that fact, worse yet somehow deliberately provoked a fight knowing 
that it might end badly, the prosecution would have strong evidence that Cota was aware of the risk 
of a fatal shooting when he took off his shirt.  On the other hand, if Cota had no idea that Almaguer 
was armed, it would easier to show that he thought the risk was limited to inju ry in a fistfight, and 
he would then lack the mens rea  necessary for manslaughter.  Even if he should  have been aware of 
that risk, unless the jury finds that he was consciously aware of a risk of death when he prepared to 
join the fight, unless the jury f inds that he was actually aware of that risk the jury couldn’t convict.  
 In summary, if Cota wanted to help Almaguer fight with Antonio, and Cota thereby 
recklessly risked a fatal shooting , Cota could be convicted  of manslaughter . 
 
Defenses  
 Cota could ass ert self -defense (or defense of others) and intoxication as defenses.   
 Self-defense (or defense of others) .  Under the MPC, an actor is justified in using force to 
defend himself or others (§ 3.04 and § 3.05).  However, it is only justified if the actor believes such 
force is “immediately necessary” for the purpose of protecting himself or another person (§ 3.04(1)  
and § 3.05(1)(a)).  Moreover, the justification is unavailable if the actor is reckless in forming the 
belief that such force is necessary (if  the mens rea of the crime for which the defense is offered is 
satisfied by recklessness) . To the extent that Cota asserts self -defense as a defense to manslaughter, 
he would lose the defense if he were reckless with respect to the need for using self -defense. 
 The facts aren’t clear as to why Cota made preparations to join Almaguer in the fight.  He 
may have believed that either he or Almaguer would be injured, perhaps seriously, and the use of 
force was necessary to prevent such injury.  And Cota may have  believed that, even if they weren’t 
going to follow the Marquess of Queensbury rules, there would be appropriate limits on the fight. 
On the other hand, Cota may have been less interested in simply preventing harm and more 
prepared to exact some kind of r evenge.   The jury could still reject Cota’s claim of self -defense (or 
defense of others) as being either insincere or recklessly formed.  
 It is a more difficult determination as to accomplice liability.  Since Cota must have the 
purpose of helping Almaguer  in the fight, it would be sufficient if Cota actually believed that such 
assistance was necessary, even if he formed such a belief recklessly.  Particularly if Cota were 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2013 , Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 5  
 
aware of Almaguer’s possession of a hand gun, he might have believed that once a fight  got started 
it would escalate and cause harm.  Even so, Cota’s encouragement to keep shooting Antonio Jr. is 
in conflict with a claimed motive to prevent anybody from getting hurt.  
 An additional aspect of self -defense is the requirement to retreat if one  knows that one can 
do so with complete safety .  (§ 3.04(2)(b)(ii).)  The prosecution might claim that any self -defense 
argument is unavailable because Cota could have simply stayed out of the fight.  On the other hand, 
Cota could plausibly claim that once  the fight started (since it had a lot to do with his own 
behavior), retreat in complete safety was not available.  Moreover, retreat is only required in 
preference to the use of deadly force if the other can avoid injury with complete safety.  (§ 
3.05(2)( a)) 
 Intoxication .  Intoxication is available as a defense if the mens rea  that the prosecution must 
prove is higher than recklessness.  Otherwise, it is of no use.  Thus, if Cota says he was so drunk he 
wasn’t aware of the potential that Almaguer’s gun mi ght be involved in a fatal shooting, such 
awareness is immaterial.  On the other hand , as with self -defense, the prosecution would have to 
prove purpose with respect to the conduct e lement of the accomplice charge.  If Cota claims that as 
a result of his i ntoxication (by alcohol or marijuana) he didn’t actually intend to assist Almaguer in 
the fight, it would be relevant evidence.  However, the jury would very likely disbelieve him.  
 
 QUESTION 2½ 
 
 The major differences in a non -MPC jurisdiction would be:  
  
(1) Standard for accomplice liability .  The common law classifications had principals and 
accessories, and accessories before the fact and after the fact.  Also, i n non -MPC jurisdictions  (such 
as California in the Luparello case) , one can be convicted not only for those crimes resulting from 
the conduct which the defendant aided or attempted to aid, but also for those crimes that are the 
“natural and probable consequence ” of the original venture.  Thus, in a non -MPC jurisdiction it 
would be sufficient if Cota only intended to assist Almaguer in fighting, if a natural and probable 
consequence of doing so would be a deadly encounter (similar to the facts in Luparello ).  It would 
not be necessary to show that Cota was aware of the risk of death.  
 
(2) Self-defen se.  Whereas the MPC recognizes “imperfect” self -defense, and permits a belief in the 
need for force as a justification, many jurisdictions (such as NY in the Goetz case) reject imperfect 
self-defense and insist that the belief be both honest and reasonabl e.  Thus, if Cota actually (but 
negligently) believed that his assistance in the fight was justified, a non -MPC jurisdiction would 
give him no credit.  
 
(3) Retreat .  Some jurisdictions would require retreat without the knowledge that retreat could be 
accom plished with complete  safety . 
 
(4) Intoxication .  Some jurisdictions  only permit evidence of intoxication as a defense to murder, 
rather than admitting it for any specific intent crime.  
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2013 , Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page 6  
 
 
CHECKLIST  
 
 ESSAY 1 
 
 Explanation  of the Retreat Rule  
 Origin at Common Law  
 Rejection by Western “manly”  states  
 MPC’s restrictive  version  
  
  
  
  
   Pros  
 Politically  popular  
 Sends a message  re criminality  
 May deter other criminal behavior  
  
 Cons  
 Encourages disrespect for human life  
 MPC rule alrea dy quite generous  
  
 
 ESSAY 2 
 
 Overview  
 Two theories  for conviction  
 Manslaughter  
 
 Actus Reus + Mens  Rea 
 Actus Reus : causing death  
 Urination  “too remote / accidental”  
 Shirt removal wasn’t a but-for cause  
 Mens rea  
 Recklessness  is minimum  standard  
 Conscious  of risk + gross deviation  
 C consciously  aware of risk of death?  
  
 Accomplice liability  
 Aid/Attempt /Agree   to assist in fight?  
 Requires purpose  to aid conduct  
 Was C reckless re risk of death?  
 Did C know about the handgun  
 Post-shooting stmt v. “accident”  
  
   Defenses  
 Self-defense , MPC § 3.04  / 3.05  
 Only to protect against unlawful  force  
 Imperfect Self-defense  
 Belief is sufficient, even if unreason.  
 No evidence he thought it necessary  
 Retreat  rule doesn’t se em to apply  
 Imperfect self -defense for accomplice  
  
 Intoxication , MPC § 4.01  
 Doesn’t help  if recklessness is suff.  
 Relevant to accomplice  liability  
 Did it affect  his decisionmaking?  
  
   
  

ESSAY 2½ 
 
 Different test for accomplice  
 Use o f nat. & prob.  doctrine  
 
 Different standard for self-defense  
 No imperfect self-defense  
  
  
 
  
 Retreat rule  might be more restrictive  
  
 Intoxication  rules  
 Excluded from “specific intent”  crimes  
  
  
   Exam # ______________  
 
DeWolf, Criminal Law, Fall 2011, Final Exam, Sample Answer  Page  7  
 
            
 
 
 
 

FALL 15 ANSWERS:
DeWolf, Final Exam Sample Answer, December 16, 2015  Page 1 of 6  
 
 
Professor DeWolf  Fall 2015  
Criminal Law  December 19, 2015  
 
 FINAL -- SAMPLE ANSWER  
 
MULTIPLE CHOICE  
 
1.  (a) is incorrect because he still has to complete a “substantial step.”  (b) is the  correct 
answer ; it may or may not be considered reconnoitering the place, but if it is so 
considered, it would qualify as a substantial step; (c) is incorrect because we don’t know 
what his intentions were; and (d) is incorrect because it might be a subst antial step  
 
2.  (a) is correct  because the crime only requires negligence; (b) is incorrect, because even 
if it caused the death, we don’t know if it was negligent or not; (c) is incorrect, because 
Steve assumed a duty by taking a job as the security guard; (d) is incorrect because a j ury 
could find that it was not too remote or accidental.  
 
3. (a) is incorrect, because the evidence might not support the finding of negligence; (b) is 
correct , because duress only applies where force is threatened; (c) is incorrect, for the 
same reason that (b) is correct; and (d) is incorrect, for the same reason.  
 
4. (a) is incorrect, because it ignores the mens rea element; (b) is incorrect, because if he is 
at least reckless in failing to recognize that she was unconscious, he can be convicted; (c) 
is correc t, because Peter must be at least reckless in failing to recognize that Stephanie 
was unconscious; (d) is incorrect, because one doesn’t have to use force if the victim is 
unconscious  
 
5. (a) is correct , because necessity requires that the crime inflict lesse r harm than the harm 
sought to be avoided; (b) is incorrect, because it might still justify the defense of 
necessity; (c) is incorrect, for the same reason that (a) is correct; (d) is incorrect, because 
it doesn’t require that the harm avoided exceed the h arm committed;  
 
6. (a) is incorrect, because the mistake was one of fact; (b) is incorrect, because the mens 
rea is knowingly or intentionally; (c) is incorrect for the same reason; and (d) is thus 
correct.  
 
7. (a) is incorrect, because she may have a self -defen se argument; (b) is incorrect because 
she might be suffering from a mental disease; (c) is true and thus correct  – it seems 
unlikely that she would reasonably believe that, but given that assumption, she would be 
acquitted. (d) is incorrect, because intoxi cation would not provide a defense to a crime 
requiring only recklessness.  
 
8. (a) is correct;  (b) is incorrect, because he must be at least reckless with respect to the 
element of the nonrecyclable nature of roofing shingles; (c) is incorrect, because one ca n 
be an accomplice without meeting of the minds; (d) is incorrect, because it does not take 
Chelsea’s actual mens rea into account  
DeWolf, Final Exam Sample Answer, December 16, 2015  Page 2 of 6  
 
 
 
9. (a) is correct; (b) is incorrect, because the MPC doesn’t recognize the distinction 
between factual and legal impossibility;  (c) is incorrect, for the same reason;  and (d) is 
incorrect because it was a mistake of fact, not law.  
 
10. (a) is correct;  (b) is incorrect, because the Code doesn’t require dangerous proximity; (c) 
is incorrect, because Walter’s abandonment was not volunta ry; he was afraid of getting 
caught; (d) is incorrect, because he is charged with attempt.  
 
11. (a) is incorrect, because Charles could still be charged with causing Bill’s injury; (b) is 
incorrect, because one only need be reckless; (c) is correct;  (d) is inc orrect because it 
doesn’t state the mens rea requirement.  
 
12. (a) is incorrect, because he must be at least reckless with respect to the result element; (b) 
is correct;  (c) is incorrect, because he could still be aware of a risk of harm; (d) is 
incorrect, bec ause even minor participants can be found to be accomplices.  
 
ESSAY 1 
 
 There are several key features of the Model Penal Code approach to the insanity defense.  
It builds upon previous formulations, such as the M’Naghten standard, but it also introduces some 
innovations .  Like other versions, it applies the insanity defense only to one who suffer s from a 
“mental disease or defect,” who as a result lack s “substantial capacity” in one of two areas:  either 
(1) to appre ciate the wrongfulness of his conduct ; or (2) to conform his conduct to the requirements 
of law.   The first “prong” is sometimes referred to as the cognitive prong, while the second is 
referred to as the control prong.  The MPC test differs in part from pr evious tests because it does 
not require what one court called a “complete prostration of faculties”; even if the defendant has 
some capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to control it, if he lacks substantial 
capacity he may be acquitt ed. 
The cognitive prong is fundamentally similar to the M’Naghten test in that it relieves the 
defendant of responsibility for criminal conduct if there is an inability to understand the nature of 
his actions (for example, if the defendant thinks that he i s shooting a Martian rather than a human 
being); or if because of mental disease he doesn’t understand the wrongfulness of committing 
crime (e.g., the defendant thinks that he is a secret agent who has a license to kill ).  The major 
difference between the cognitive prong of the MPC test and the earlier McNaghten test is that it is 
not simply a recognition test, but permits the defendant to avoid conviction if he lacks substantial 
capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness  of his conduct.  Thus, John Hinckley avoided conviction 
for shooting President Reagan in part because the jury found that he was unable to appreciate  that 
what he was doing was wrong.  
 The second prong of the test – the control prong – is based on the MPC  authors’ belief that 
criminal conviction should only follow from acts over which the defendant has meaningful control.  
If a jury finds that the defendant, as a result of mental disease or defect, is unable to control his 
conduct, then it makes no more se nse to punish him than it would to punish someone because their 
leg pops up after someone struck his knee cap with a reflex hammer.  
 Critics of the MPC test have focused on two areas.  First, they doubt that the “appreciation” 
or “substantial capacity” provi sions of the test are an improvement over the earlier requirements 
DeWolf, Final Exam Sample Answer, December 16, 2015  Page 3 of 6  
 
 
that the defendant’s mental disease or defect prevented the defendant from recognizing the 
wrongfulness of conduct.  The fact that the defendant understands what he is doing, but doesn’t 
appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct, shouldn’t be a bar to criminal conviction.  (I may 
understand the service that Navy Seals provide without appreciating them.)  And criminal guilt is 
not limited to those who have an unimpaired ability to abide by the law.  Even those for whom 
lawful behavior is difficult are still subject to criminal conviction if they disobey.  Why should it 
be different for someone who has some capacity, but perhaps lacks substantial capacity in these 
areas?  
 The more severe criticis m has been leveled at the control prong.  The theory of the MPC – 
that science (particularly the science of psychiatry) would be able to identify those who are unable 
to control their conduct (as distinguished from those who can, but prefer not to ) has not  held up 
over time.  Psychiatrists can debate one another as to whether a particular individual suffers from 
some mental disease, and how most effectively to treat it, but they cannot provide reliable guidance 
in distinguishing from those who canno t obey the law, as distinguished from those who simply 
choose not to.  Consequently, courts like Lyons decided that they would no longer recognize the 
control prong of the MPC test.  Other jurisdictions have similarly reformulated their test for 
insanity.  Congress eliminated the control prong after the Hinckley case.  
 Another approach has been to offer the jury a third alternative in addition to guilt or 
acquittal by reason of insanity:  guilty but mentally ill.  This approach is favored by those who 
recog nize that a person may be mentally ill and yet still responsible for their criminal conduct.  
Moreover, it assures the jury that the defendant will be incarcerated in a place where they cannot 
harm the public further.  Thus, defendants like Andrea Yates, w ho drowned her five children in 
the bathtub, may clearly be mentally ill, but she isn’t free from responsibility for her conduct.  
 Nonetheless, many commentators point out that the debate over the insanity defense is 
overblown because very few cases actual ly raise the defense, and fewer still are successful.  In 
addition, studies of jury verdicts comparing the different formulation of the test seem to make little 
difference in whether the jury applies the defense or not.  Thus the debate is a tempest in a t eapot 
rather than a genuine source of concern about the effectiveness of the criminal justice system.  
 
ESSAY 2 
 
 Milton could be charged with two different kinds of crimes:  first, he could be charged with 
conspiracy to commit arson; second, with being an accomplice to arson.  He would assert the 
defense of duress, and would deny that he committed any actus reus on either charge.  
 Conviction of either crime requires proof of two elements:  that the defendant committed 
a criminal act ( actus reus ) and that h e did so with the requisite mens rea (“guilty mind”).  
 
Conspiracy to Commit Arson  
 Actus Reus.  Milton would be guilty of conspiring to commit arson if he agreed with Earnest 
that Earnest should commit arson.  MPC §§ 5.03(1)(a); 220.1(1)(b).  The question here is whether 
Milton actually agreed with Earnest.  Earnest made the proposal, and the facts a re silent as to 
whether Milton verbally responded .  If Milton didn ’t actually agree, he can’t be convicted of 
conspiring.  Milton ’s inquiry about what Earnest wanted him to do, followed by arguably doing 
what Earnest asked, could support a finding that he di d actually agree.  On the other hand , mere 
silence coupled with a failure to do something  wouldn ’t be agreement . 
DeWolf, Final Exam Sample Answer, December 16, 2015  Page 4 of 6  
 
 
 There is no overt act req uirement, because this is a felony of the second degree.  MPC § 
5.03(5).  Moreover, so long as Earnest committed an overt act  (which he did) , that requirement 
would be fulfilled.  
 Mens rea .  The jury would have to be convinced that if Milton agreed with Earnest, he did 
so for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the crime.  It sounds from the 
facts as though Milton was at least ambivalent – the arson wasn’t his idea, and he might deny that 
he actually desired that the arson take place.  In cases where the defend ant actually aided another, 
but denied having the purpose of doing so, courts have looked to whether the defendant, in addition 
to knowing of the criminal purpose of those they were working with, actually had a stake in the 
outcome or otherwise benefitted from the “co -conspirator’s” activities to t he point where you could 
fairly say that the defendant did more than just his daily work.  Earnest offered to “remember” 
Milton when he got his money, so a jury could find that Milton agreed with Earnest for the purpose 
of obtaining a fina ncial pay -off. 
 
Accomplice to Arson   
 Actus reus .  Milton might be accused of helping Earnest commit arson: MPC § 
2.06(3)(a)(ii) makes him an accomplice if, with the purpose of promoting the commission of the 
offense, he aids or agrees or attempts to aid a nother in committing it.  Milton might argue that he 
didn’t do anything, and therefore (a)(ii) wouldn’t apply.  However, if Milton changed his cleaning 
routine so that he was on a different floor, and therefore wouldn’t smell the smoke, then a jury 
could find that he aided Earnest in the commission of the crime.  
MPC § 2.06(3)(a)(iii) would also make him an accomplice if, having the legal duty to 
prevent the commission of the offense, he failed to do so.  Ordinarily, one does not have a duty to 
prevent another from  harm.  One can decline to be a “good Samaritan” without legal consequence.  
However, if there is a duty to act  then the failure to act can be considered criminal (if it otherwise 
meets the requirements).  So, for example, a parent who neglects a child and  thereby causes the 
child’s death may be convicted of a form of homicide (depending upon the culpability involved).  
Here the prosecution would have to prove that Milton had a duty to report the fire.  Legal duties 
can arise from a statute, from a status r elationship (e.g., family), from a contractual relationship, 
and from voluntarily assuming a duty to act.  The only applicable category would be the third – 
the existence of a contractual relationship.  Because he was an employee, Milton could be found 
to have a duty to his employer to call the fire department or perhaps to alert the police regarding 
Earnest’s plans.  His failure to do so could be considered a culpable act, just as if he had actually 
observed a fire in the buildi ng and deliberately neglected to call the fire department.  
 Mens rea .  The prosecution w ould also have to prove that Milton had the requisite mens 
rea to be an accomplice.  Ordinarily, to be an accomplice one must act with the purpose of 
facilitating or promoting the offense.  As with conspiracy, it’s unclear from the facts what he 
actually did or didn’t do .  Pe rhaps he simply did his normal routine, and wasn’t sure whether 
Earnest was serious about what he told him.  Perhaps he altered his routine and would normally 
have been in a place where he would have smelled smoke and called the fire department, but 
delibe rately chose to be elsewhere —pursuant to Earnest’s request —so that he would have 
“plausible deniability.”  It’s not enough to show that Milton knew that by going elsewhere he was 
making it easier for Earnest’s plans to succeed – he has to have done so with  the purpose of helping 
Earnest.  The analysis would depend upon whether Milton were prosecuted under MPC § 
2.06(3)(a)(ii) and/or § 2.06(3)(a)(iii).  Under (a)(ii), the prosecution could argue that he altered his 
DeWolf, Final Exam Sample Answer, December 16, 2015  Page 5 of 6  
 
 
way of cleaning for the purpose of helping Earnest commit the crime.   Under (a)(iii), it would 
have to be shown that he “failed” to make a “proper” effort to prevent the crime.   
 Just as in the analysis of conspiracy, Milton’s purpose may be inferred from the fact that 
he stood to gain something from the arson.  Earnest promised to “remember him” when he got his 
money.  If the jury finds that Milton was motivated to stand by and do nothing while the fire burned 
because he thought he would be rewarded for this conduct, then he could be said to have  the 
purpose of facilitating the commission of the crime.  
 
Duress  
 An otherwise criminal act can be excused if it resulted from duress.  Under MPC § 2.09, 
Milton would be excused if Milton “was coerced to [commit arson] by the use of, or a threat to 
use, u nlawful force against his person or the person of another, which a person of reasonable 
firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist.”  The first question is whether there was 
the use of or threat of the use of unlawful force against his pers on.  Milton was afraid of Earnest, 
but he wouldn’t be entitled to the defense unless there was a use of force or threat of the use of 
unlawful force.  Even if he had evidence that Earnest had threatened him, Milton still wouldn’t be 
entitled to the defense  unless a person of reasonable firmness would have been unable to resist.  If 
a person of reasonable firmness would have gone to the police rather than capitulate to Earnest, 
then he would be denied the defense.  
 If found guilty of both conspiracy and comp licity, Milton could only be convicted of one, 
because the conspiracy to commit a crime and the actual commission merge.  MPC § 1.07(1)(b).  
  
ESSAY 2½  
 
 There are several differences if the MPC is not followed.  
 Overt Act for Conspiracy .  Some jurisdictions would include a requirement for a conspiracy 
conviction that the defendant commit an over t act. 
 Multiple Prosecutions .  Under the MPC, Milton could not be convicted of conspiring to 
commit arson and committing arson, even if all the elements of bo th crimes were proven.  Under 
the MPC they merge.  However, in jurisdictions like the federal system, following the Pinkerton 
rule, Milton could be convicted both of  conspiracy and of arson, if both crimes were proven.  
 Different standard for accomplice l iability .  Under the MPC, Milton has to have the 
purpose of facilitating this particular crime.  Some jurisdictions  could permit an accomplice who 
merely knows of the assistance they are providing to be convicted of being an accomplice .  Other 
jurisdictions might only permit an accomplice to be convicted if the principal is also convicted.  
 Different formulat ion of duress .  Some jurisdictions would not use the “reasonable 
firmness” standard; some would require that the use of force or threat be imminent in order to 
entitled use of the defense.  
  
DeWolf, Final Exam Sample Answer, December 16, 2015  Page 6 of 6  
 
 
 
 
MC Score _____           CHECKLIST  
 
ESSAY 1 
 
 Description of MPC Insanity  Defense  
 Requires proof of mental disease/defect  
 Cognitive prong  
 Control prong  
 Appreciation  
 Substantial capacity  
 
 Criticism  
 “Appreciation” too generous   Control prong   
 Lack of scientific basis  
 Congress  abandoned control prong  
 GBMI  
 Different tests yield similar results   
 Few cases invoke defense/fewer succeed  
  
  
 
ESSAY 2 
 
 Overview  
 Actus reus + mens rea  
 Conspiracy  
 Did Milton agree  
 Agreement inferred from behavior  
 Must be proof of agreement ? 
 No overt act requirement  
  
 Mens rea  
 Did he intend to agree  
 Did he have a stake in the outcome ? 
  
 Accomplice  liability  
 Actus reus :  act or failure to act  
 2.06(3)(a)(iii):  did he have a duty to act?   Contract as basis for duty  
 Did Milton fail to prevent crime?  
 What would be a proper  effort?  
 Did M have mens rea for complicity?  
 Must have purpose  of facilitating  
  
 Duress  
 No use of force  or threat of force  
 Did M exhibit reasonable firmness?  
 Merger of complicity and conspiracy  
  
  
  
  
 2.06(3)(a)(ii): did he act to facilitate  
          
ESSAY 2½  
 
 Overt act might be required  
 Multiple prosecutions  
 Lower standard for complicity  
 Different standard for duress    
  
 
 
 
          Exam # _______________  